Source: https://ecode360.com/45479331 (City of Pittsburgh Zoning Code, § 922.09 Variances; rendered via browser on 2026-09-26, code through 2026-09-16)

§ 922.09
Variances.
This section sets out the required review and approval procedures for Variances.
A. 
Initiation. An application for a Variance may be filed by the owner of the subject property or the owner's agent.
B. 
Application. A complete application for a Variance shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator in a form established by the Zoning Administrator, along with a nonrefundable fee that has been established to defray the cost of processing development applications. No application shall be processed until the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is complete and the required fee has been paid.
C. 
Notice. Promptly upon determining that an application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule a public hearing before the Zoning Board of Adjustment, notify the applicant of the hearing date and give at least twenty-one (21) days notice of the hearing by mail and posting, in accordance with the notice requirements of Section 922.01.C.1 and Section 922.01.C.2. The required area of notification shall include no less than six (6) property owners which are nearest the subject property, as reasonably determined by the Zoning Administrator, and shall, regardless of number, include abutting property owners, and those immediately across a street or way. On the application, the applicant shall include names and mailing addresses of property owners who are required to be notified.
D. 
Hearing and Action.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing on the Variance application. After the public hearing, the Board shall act to approve, approve with conditions, approve in part, deny, or deny in part the application within forty-five (45) days of the Board hearing. Where the Board fails to render its decision within the period required by this subsection, or fails to hold the required public hearing within forty-five (45) days from the date of the completed application being received by the Administrator, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in denial of the application unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in denial of the application because of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Zoning Administrator shall give public notice of said decision within ten (10) days, according to the provisions of Section 922.09.C. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal for reconsideration.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment's action shall be based on stated findings of fact. The conditions imposed on uses classified as Variances shall be construed as limitations on the power of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to act. A mere recitation of the conditions for approval, unaccompanied by specific findings of fact, shall not be considered findings of fact for the purpose of complying with this Code.
E. 
General Conditions for Approval.
No variance in the strict application of any provisions of this Zoning Code shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment unless it finds that all of the following conditions exist:
1. 
That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to the conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the zoning ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located;
2. 
That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;
3. 
That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant;
4. 
That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare; and
5. 
That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.
In granting any variance, the board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement to purposes of this act and the zoning ordinance
The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that the proposal satisfies the applicable review criteria.
